added restoring data KB - first draft (#1187)
longhorn/website: content/kb/restoring-data-from-an-orphaned-replica-directory.md

> -----
> title: "Restoring Data from an Orphaned Replica Directory"
> authors:
>   - "Sushant Gaurav"
> draft: false
> date: 2025-09-02
> versions:
> - All
> categories:
> - "Data Recovery"
> - "Troubleshooting"
> -----

Reviewer: CI failed because of header YAML.

```suggestion
---
title: "Restoring Data from an Orphaned Replica Directory"
authors:
- "Sushant Gaurav"
draft: false
date: 2025-09-02
versions:
- All
categories:
- "Data Recovery"
- "Troubleshooting"
---
```

## Applicable versions

Longhorn v1.10.x versions.

## Overview

This guide explains how to restore data from a **replica directory** that is no longer being managed by Longhorn. This situation is referred to as **orphaned data** and can occur if the Longhorn system loses track of the replica, or if a volume is accidentally deleted without properly detaching the replica directories.

Although the Longhorn UI no longer manages this replica, the raw volume data remains on the disk. By following the steps below, you can access and recover your data.

## Before you begin

This process involves running commands on the node where the orphaned replica is located. You will need `SSH` access to that node.

> Additionally, to avoid potential data corruption, you must verify that the replica is **not in use** by any active processes. Use the `lsof` command to check for any open files within the directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid potential data corruption, you must verify that the replica is not in use by Longhorn or any other active processes. For example, you can use commands such as `lsof` or `fuser` to check whether any processes are accessing files within the replica directory.
```

For example:

```sh
# lsof /var/lib/longhorn/replicas/pvc-06b4a8a8-b51d-42c6-a8cc-d8c8d6bc65bc-d890efb2/
```

> If the command returns a result, do not proceed. If the command returns an empty result, the directory is safe to work with.

Reviewer 2: Remove the example.

## Step-by-step guide

### 1. Identify the orphaned replica directory

> Replica directories are stored on the node's disks under the path defined by the `Default Data Path` setting (by default, `/var/lib/longhorn/`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Longhorn replica directories are stored under the storage paths configured in the Longhorn `Node` CRs.
```

Replace `<data_path>`, `<volume_name>`, and `<volume_size>` with your specific values.

```sh
docker run -v /dev:/host/dev -v /proc:/host/proc -v <data_path>:/volume --privileged longhornio/longhorn-engine:<longhorn_engine_version> launch-simple-longhorn <volume_name> <volume_size>
```

For example, using the values from the previous steps:

```sh
docker run -v /dev:/host/dev -v /proc:/host/proc -v /var/lib/longhorn/replicas/pvc-06b4a8a8-b51d-42c6-a8cc-d8c8d6bc65bc-d890efb2:/volume --privileged longhornio/longhorn-engine:v1.6.2 launch-simple-longhorn pvc-06b4a8a8-b51d-42c6-a8cc-d8c8d6bc65bc 1073741824
```

After running this command, a block device will be created at `/dev/longhorn/<volume_name>`, such as `/dev/longhorn/pvc-06b4a8a8-b51d-42c6-a8cc-d8c8d6bc65bc`.

### 4. Access and restore your data

You can now mount the new block device to access your files. It is recommended to mount the volume as **read-only** to prevent any accidental changes to the data.

```sh
# mount -o ro /dev/longhorn/pvc-06b4a8a8-b51d-42c6-a8cc-d8c8d6bc65bc /mnt/recovered-data
```

> Once mounted, you can copy the data to a new location or a new Longhorn volume.

Reviewer 2: Same as above.
Consolidate 3 and 4, but keep `Once mounted, you can copy the data to a new location or a new Longhorn volume.`.
